PROJECT REPORT
Python Login System with Weather & Instagram Integration
1. Cover Page
Project Title: Python Login System with Weather and Instagram Integration 
Submitted By: Dhananjay Naik
 Project Type: Python Mini Project Programming Language: Python 3.x Tools Used: VS Code, Command Line Interface (CLI), REST APIs Date: 23 November 2025

2. Introduction
For this mini-project, I developed a console-based application that functions as a secure dashboard. Instead of just building a standalone login system, I wanted to create something that actually performs useful tasks after the user logs in.

Once authenticated, the system acts as a utility tool where users can:

Securely log in or create a new account.

Check real-time weather conditions for any city.

Quickly fetch public analytics (followers/following) for Instagram profiles.

The main goal was to learn how to connect different technologies—authentication logic, JSON file handling, and external APIs—into a single, working program.

3. Problem Statement
When learning Python, most tutorials focus on one thing at a time: either a login script OR a weather app. I noticed a lack of beginner-level projects that combine these elements into a unified "system."

The challenge was to build a program that:

Persists user data (so you don't lose your account when you close the app).

Secures the entry point (Login).

Integrates live data from the internet (Weather & Instagram).

This project solves that by creating a modular system where authentication is the gateway to these features.

4. Functional Requirements
What the system actually does:

User Management: Users can Sign Up (create an entry) and Log In.

Data Persistence: It automatically saves and retrieves user credentials from a local users.json file.

Session Tracking: It remembers and displays the exact time the user last logged in.

Weather Module: It connects to the OpenWeatherMap API to fetch live temperature and humidity.

Instagram Module: It uses the instaloader library to scrape basic profile stats.

Security: It handles wrong passwords by giving the user limited retries before kicking them out.

5. Non-Functional Requirements
How the system behaves:

Usability: The text menus are designed to be simple and easy to navigate using number options.

Performance: API calls are optimized to fetch data quickly without freezing the terminal.

Reliability: The program shouldn't crash if the user types a wrong city name or loses internet connection.

Portability: Since it uses JSON and standard libraries, it runs on any computer with Python installed.

6. System Architecture
The flow of data is linear and user-driven.

Plaintext

[ User ]  --->  [ Login System ]  --->  [ JSON Database ]
                      |
                  (If Valid)
                      |
              [ Main Dashboard ]
             /                  \
    [ Weather API ]       [ Instagram Scraper ]
           |                        |
    (Returns Data)           (Returns Data)
7. Design Diagrams
7.1 Workflow Logic
Start -> User is prompted to Login or Register.

Verification -> System checks users.json.

If New: Create record -> Save to JSON.

If Existing: Verify Password.

Dashboard -> User selects a service.

Option 1: Input City -> Fetch Weather -> Display.

Option 2: Input Username -> Fetch Stats -> Display.

Exit -> User logs out -> System saves the timestamp.

7.2 Sequence of Events
User enters credentials.

Main Program reads the JSON file.

Logic compares the input string with the stored string.

Success: The specific utility functions (weather_service, insta_service) are unlocked.

8. Design Decisions & Rationale
Why JSON instead of SQL? For a project of this size, setting up a MySQL server seemed like overkill. JSON is lightweight, human-readable, and requires no extra installation.

Why OpenWeather API? It is reliable, free for small projects, and returns data in a clean JSON format that is easy to parse in Python.

Why CLI (Command Line)? I wanted to focus strictly on backend logic and Python syntax without worrying about the complexities of UI libraries like Tkinter or PyQt yet.

9. Implementation Details
Core Libraries Used:

json: To handle the reading and writing of the user database.

requests: To send HTTP requests to the Weather API.

instaloader: A specialized library to handle Instagram's complex data structure.

datetime: To capture login timestamps.

Key Functions:

load_users(): Reads the database at startup so the program knows who is registered.

login(): The main security gatekeeper.

get_weather(city): Handles the API request and parses the response.

10. Sample Output (Screenshots)
Since this is a CLI project, here is a text representation of a successful session:

Plaintext

=== WELCOME TO PYTHON SYSTEM ===
1. Login
2. Register
> 1

Enter username: DHANANJAY
Enter password: ****
[SUCCESS] Welcome back, DHANANJAY!
Last Login: 2025-11-22 14:30:00

--- DASHBOARD ---
1. Check Weather
2. Instagram Stats
3. Logout
> 1

Enter city: Bengaluru
--------------------------
Weather in Bengaluru:
Temperature: 27°C
Condition: Clear Sky
--------------------------
11. Testing Approach
I performed manual testing to ensure the system is robust:

Login Testing: I tried logging in with wrong passwords to ensure the "Access Denied" message appeared.

Input Validation: I entered random numbers and symbols as city names to ensure the program caught the error instead of crashing.

Data Check: I manually opened the users.json file after creating an account to verify the data was actually saved.

12. Challenges Faced
API Errors: Initially, if the internet was off, the program would crash with a generic error. I had to learn how to use try-except blocks to handle connection errors gracefully.

Instaloader Limits: I realized that checking too many Instagram profiles too quickly causes Instagram to block requests. I had to handle this "429 Too Many Requests" error.

JSON Formatting: Dealing with empty JSON files (when the first user registers) caused a crash. I added logic to check if the file exists before reading it.

13. Learnings & Key Takeaways
This project was a great learning experience. I specifically learned:

How to parse JSON data from APIs (extracting just the temp/humidity from a massive block of text).

The importance of Modular Programming—keeping the weather logic separate from the login logic made the code much easier to fix.

How Authentication actually works behind the scenes (matching strings and updating records).

14. Future Enhancements
In the future, I plan to improve this by:

Adding a GUI: Using Tkinter to make it look like a real desktop app.

Password Hashing: Currently, passwords are plain text. I want to use the hashlib library to encrypt them for security.

Profile Management: allowing users to change their passwords or delete their accounts.

15. References
Python Documentation: docs.python.org

OpenWeatherMap API Docs: openweathermap.org

Stack Overflow: For resolving the JSONDecodeError